Merge the "Simplifying NoSQL Database Integration with Jakarta NoSQL" blogpost into staging (#3751)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2024-05-13-jakarta-nosql-challenge-switching-nosql-easily.adoc

title: "Jakarta NoSQL in Action: Switching NoSQL Databases with Ease"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/dearrudam
author_github: https://github.com/dearrudam
seo-title: TITLE - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: In this cloud era, switching between NoSQL solutions could be a great way to save resources and costs, but it could be a nightmare, especially if we're highly coupled to a particular vendor. See how the flexibility of Jakarta NoSQL with an implementation like Eclipse JNoSQL could help to solve this issue.

blog_description: "In this cloud era, switching between NoSQL solutions could be a great way to save resources and costs, but it could be a nightmare, especially if we're highly coupled to a particular vendor. See how the flexibility of Jakarta NoSQL with an implementation like Eclipse JNoSQL could help to solve this issue."
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= Jakarta NoSQL in Action: Switching NoSQL Databases with Ease
Maximillian Arruda <https://github.com/dearrudam>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
:toc: preamble

> Nowadays, in the cloud era, switching between NoSQL solutions could be an interesting way to save resources and costs, but it could be a nightmare, specially if we're highly coupled to a particular vendor. It can cause changes that could make this approach very expensive, e.g.: time spent on the change, the learning curve of a new API to use with this database, the code that will be lost, the persistence layer that needs to be replaced, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the cloud era, switching between NoSQL solutions could be an interesting way to save resources and costs. It could also be a nightmare, especially if we're highly coupled to a particular vendor. Certain changes could make this approach very expensive: time spent on the change, the learning curve of a new API to use with this database, the code that will be lost, the persistence layer that needs to be replaced, etc.
```

> This is where the flexibility of Jakarta NoSQL with an implementation like https://www.jnosql.org[Eclipse JNoSQL] together shines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where the flexibility of Jakarta NoSQL, with an implementation like https://www.jnosql.org[Eclipse JNoSQL], shines.
```

NOTE: As of March 2024, Eclipse JNoSQL supports about https://www.jnosql.org/docs/supported_dbs.html[30 NoSQL databases].

To explore this capability, let's use the link:../../../2024/05/06/jakarta-nosql-in-action-meet-jnopo-game.html[*JNopo* game] introduced in blog 2 of this series.

> In our scenario, let's suppose that we need to change the *JNopo*'s Document NoSQL database from *MongoDB*, to another Document NoSQL database (e.g. *Couchbase*) to enable us to save money. The good thing is that because we've already used the Jakarta NoSQL specification to connect to our NoSQL solutions in this application, with just a few small changes we'll be able to achieve this goal easily. Let's take a look at the steps we need to take for this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our scenario, let's suppose that we need to change the JNopo's Document NoSQL database from MongoDB, to another Document NoSQL database (Couchbase) to save money. The good thing is that because we've already used the Jakarta NoSQL specification to connect to our NoSQL solutions in this application, with just a few small changes we'll be able to achieve this goal easily. Let's take a look at the steps we need to take for this.
```

=== Configuring Eclipse JNoSQL dependencies for Couchbase

The first step we need to take is to add the Couchbase dependency to our the `pom.xml` file:

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.eclipse.jnosql.databases</groupId>
  <artifactId>jnosql-couchbase</artifactId>
  <version>1.1.0</version>
</dependency>
----

> === Configuring a Local Couchbase Cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Configuring a local Couchbase cluster
```

To successfully configure our new Couchbase cluster, we'll first need to add the following content to the `docker-compose.yml` file:

[source, yaml]
----
  couchbase-db:
    image: couchbase
    container_name: couchbase-db
    ports:
      - "8091-8097:8091-8097"
      - "9123:9123"
      - "11207:11207"
      - "11210:11210"
      - "11280:11280"
      - "18091-18097:18091-18097"
----

After we apply these changes, we then need to initialize the container by executing the following command:

[source, bash]
----
docker-compose up -d
----

Now, let's configure the Couchbase cluster for this example scenario:

> . With the Couchbase container started, go to: http://localhost:8091/ui/index.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. With the Couchbase container started, go to: http://localhost:8091/ui/index.html.
```

> . Select the "Configure New Cluster" option

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Select the *Setup New Cluster* option
```

> . Select the "Configure New Cluster" option

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Select the "Configure New Cluster" option.
```

+
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-01.png[Couchbase 01, align="center" width=80%]

> . Define a name for the cluster name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Define a name for the cluster.
```

> . Define a name for the cluster name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Define a name for the cluster.
```

> . Set `root` to "Administrator" username

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Set `root` as the Admin Username.
```

> . Set `123456` as "Password"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Set `123456` as the Password.
```

+
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-02.png[Couchbase 02, align="center" width=80%]

> . Check “I accept the terms and conditions” and click the “Finish With Defaults” button

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Check *I accept the terms and conditions* and click the *Finish With Defaults* button.
```

+
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-03.png[Couchbase 03, align="center" width=80%]

> . Go to the "Buckets" section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Go to the *Buckets* section.
```

> . Create a `jnopo` Bucket by clicking on the "Add Bucket" option

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a `jnopo` Bucket by clicking on the *Add Bucket* option.
```

+
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-04.png[Couchbase 04, align="center" width=80%]

> . Click on "Scopes & Collections" and then click on "Add Collection"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click *Scopes & Collections* and then click  *Add Collection*.
```

> . Enter `GameMatch` as the collection name and click the "Save" button to complete your creation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Enter `GameMatch` as the collection name and click the *Save* button to complete your creation.
```

+
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-05.png[Couchbase 05, align="center" width=80%]

> . Now, in the "Query" section, run this command https://www.couchbase.com/products/n1ql/[N1QL] to create the primary index for the `GameMatch` collection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Now, in the *Query Editor* section, run the https://www.couchbase.com/products/n1ql/[N1QL] command to create the primary index for the `GameMatch` collection:
```

+
[source, n1ql]
----
CREATE PRIMARY INDEX primaryGameMatch ON jnopo._default.GameMatch
----
+
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-06.png[Couchbase 06, align="center" width=80%]

With a Couchbase cluster running, we just need to set up Eclipse JNoSQL to connect to it.

Apply the following changes into the `resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties` file:

[source, properties]
----
## Couchbase
jnosql.couchbase.host=couchbase://localhost
jnosql.couchbase.user=root
jnosql.couchbase.password=123456
jnosql.document.provider=org.eclipse.jnosql.databases.couchbase.communication.CouchbaseDocumentConfiguration
----

The `jnosql.document.provider` property is required in this context because we have more than one Eclipse JNoSQL Database API for Document NoSQL implementations. You can learn more about the configurations available for Eclipse JNoSQL Database API for Couchbase in this https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#configuration-2[Git repository].

> That's all! Let's restart the https://openliberty.io/[Open Liberty] runtime in order to be able to make sure that everything is running smoothly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's all! Let's restart the https://openliberty.io/[Open Liberty] runtime in to make sure that everything is running smoothly:
```

> * On Linux/Mac machines, perform the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* On Linux/Mac machines, run the following command:
```

+
[source, bash]
----
./mvnw liberty:dev
----

> * On Windows machines, perform the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* On Windows machines, run the following command:
```

+
[source, powershell]
----
mvnw.cmd liberty:dev
----

> After some game matches, you should see something similar to that shown in the images below to prove that this data is now being stored in our new Couchbase database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After some game matches, you should see something similar to the following images to prove that this data is now being stored in our new Couchbase database.
```

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-verification-01.png[Couchbase Verification 01, align="center" width=80%]
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-verification-02.png[Couchbase Verification 02, align="center" width=80%]

If you're interesting to take a look on the finished project code developed during this challenge, clone this https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-jakartaNoSQL-game[Git repository] and navigate to the `database-switching-challenge` directory.

[source, bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-jakartaNoSQL-game.git
cd sample-jakartaNoSQL-game
cd database-switching-challenge
----

> == Key Takeaways

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Key takeaways
```

This blog has shown just how easy it can be to switch between NoSQL solutions by using Jakarta NoSQL, bringing one more item to your utility belt that could be useful in helping you save resources and costs.

By reading this blog, you should now be familiar with:

* How to set up the Couchbase database cluster for development purposes;

* How to switch between NoSQL database from different vendors, in our example: switching from MongoDB to Couchbase;

> == Next Steps: Continuing the Journey

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Next steps: continuing the journey
```

- https://github.com/jnosql/demos-se
- https://github.com/JNOSQL/demos-ee

To learn more about Eclipse JNoSQL, take a look at these official repositories:

- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql
- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases
- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-extensions

if you're an expert on some NoSQL database that Eclipse JNoSQL doesn't support, feel free to open an issue or a PR on the project repositories mentioned above. Except for the NoSQL solutions mentioned like MongoDB and Couchbase, all the technology used in this blog post are open-source, so, what do you think about contributing to these projects? If you don't know how to get started to contribute, take a look at this https://www.youtube.com/live/7qhHOOoZEBU?feature=share[Coffee.withJava("Contribute to JNoSQL") Youtube Series], or if you prefer, feel free to contact me! Contributing to these projects is not just with codes, you could help a lot by promoting and speaking about them wherever you go! Contributing to open-source is a great way to boost your career, and improve your skills to become an effective developer and relevant in the market! Think about that!

> == Special Thanks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Special thanks
```

---
layout: post
title: "Jakarta NoSQL in Action: Switching NoSQL Databases with Ease"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/dearrudam
author_github: https://github.com/dearrudam
seo-title: TITLE - OpenLiberty.io

> seo-description: |

Reviewer: this pipe is causing a metadata error that will prevent the post from building- need to delete it and bring the description text up a line

---
layout: post
title: "Jakarta NoSQL in Action: Switching NoSQL Databases with Ease"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/dearrudam
author_github: https://github.com/dearrudam
seo-title: TITLE - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: |

>   Nowadays, in the cloud era, switching between NoSQL solutions could be interesting to save resources and costs, but it could be a nightmare, especially if we're highly coupled to a particular vendor. It will cause some changes that will make this approach very expensive, like: time spent on the change, the learning curve of a new API to use with this database, the code that will be lost, the persistence layer that needs to be replaced, etc. This is where the flexibility of Jakarta NoSQL with an implementation like Eclipse JNoSQL together shines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this cloud era, switching between NoSQL solutions could be a great way to save resources and costs, but it could be a nightmare, especially if we're highly coupled to a particular vendor. See how the flexibility of Jakarta NoSQL with an implementation like Eclipse JNoSQL could help to solve this issue.
```

> blog_description: "Nowadays, in the cloud era, switching between NoSQL solutions could be interesting to save resources and costs, but it could be a nightmare, especially if we're highly coupled to a particular vendor. It will cause some changes that will make this approach very expensive, like: time spent on the change, the learning curve of a new API to use with this database, the code that will be lost, the persistence layer that needs to be replaced, etc. This is where the flexibility of Jakarta NoSQL with an implementation like Eclipse JNoSQL together shines."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
blog_description: "In this cloud era, switching between NoSQL solutions could be a great way to save resources and costs, but it could be a nightmare, especially if we're highly coupled to a particular vendor. See how the flexibility of Jakarta NoSQL with an implementation like Eclipse JNoSQL could help to solve this issue."
```

// can be left empty which will set it to the default
//
// "open-graph-image-alt" is a description of what is in the image (not a caption). When changing "open-graph-image" to
// a custom picture, you must provide a custom string for "open-graph-image-alt".
//
// Replace DESCRIPTION with a short summary (~60 words) of the release (a more succinct version of the first paragraph of the post).
//
// If adding image into the post add :
// -------------------------
// [.img_border_light]
// image::img/blog/FILE_NAME[IMAGE CAPTION ,width=70%,align="center"]
// -------------------------
// "[.img_border_light]" = This adds a faint grey border around the image to make its edges sharper. Use it around screenshots but not
// around diagrams. Then double check how it looks.
// There is also a "[.img_border_dark]" class which tends to work best with screenshots that are taken on dark backgrounds.
// Change "FILE_NAME" to the name of the image file. Also make sure to put the image into the right folder which is: img/blog
// change the "IMAGE CAPTION" to a couple words of what the image is
// // // // // // // //

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Nowadays, in the cloud era, switching between NoSQL solutions could be interesting to save resources and costs, but it could be a nightmare, specially if we're highly coupled to a particular vendor. It will cause some changes that will make this approach very expensive, like: time spent on the change, the learning curve of a new API to use with this database, the code that will be lost, the persistence layer that needs to be replaced, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nowadays, in the cloud era, switching between NoSQL solutions could be an interesting way to save resources and costs, but it could be a nightmare, specially if we're highly coupled to a particular vendor. It can cause changes that could make this approach very expensive, e.g.: time spent on the change, the learning curve of a new API to use with this database, the code that will be lost, the persistence layer that needs to be replaced, etc.
```

This is where the flexibility of Jakarta NoSQL with an implementation like https://www.jnosql.org[Eclipse JNoSQL] together shines.

NOTE: As of March 2024, Eclipse JNoSQL supports about https://www.jnosql.org/docs/supported_dbs.html[30 NoSQL databases].

== Jakarta NoSQL in Action: Switching NoSQL Databases with Ease

> To explore this capability, let's use the link:../../../2024/05/06/jakarta-nosql-in-action-meet-jnopo-game.html[*JNopo* game].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To explore this capability, let's use the link:../../../2024/05/06/jakarta-nosql-in-action-meet-jnopo-game.html[*JNopo* game] introduced in blog 2 of this series.
```

> Here's the challenge: let's suppose that it's needed to change the *JNopo*'s Document NoSQL database, *MongoDB*, to another Document NoSQL database for save money purposes, e.g. *Couchbase*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our scenario, let's suppose that we need to change the *JNopo*'s Document NoSQL database from *MongoDB*, to another Document NoSQL database (e.g. *Couchbase*) to enable us to save money. The good thing is that because we've already used the Jakarta NoSQL specification to connect to our NoSQL solutions in this application, with just a few small changes we'll be able to achieve this goal easily. Let's take a look at the steps we need to take for this.
```

> By using Jakarta NoSQL specification to connect to the NoSQL solutions, we got some benefits and one of them is that with just a few changes, we'll be able to achive this goal easily.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

=== Configuring Eclipse JNoSQL dependencies for Couchbase

> In the `pom.xml` file, add the following dependency:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first step we need to take is to add the Couchbase dependency to our the `pom.xml` file:
```

[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.eclipse.jnosql.databases</groupId>
  <artifactId>jnosql-couchbase</artifactId>
  <version>1.1.0</version>
</dependency>
----

=== Configuring a Local Couchbase Cluster

> First of all, let's add the following content to the `docker-compose.yml` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To successfully configure our new Couchbase cluster, we'll first need to add the following content to the `docker-compose.yml` file:
```

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to have a short sentence here explaining why we have done this. At the moment it feels a little like we're getting the audience to just follow steps without giving them the explanation/context as to why these steps are needed so they can apply it to their own applications.

[source, yaml]
----
  couchbase-db:
    image: couchbase
    container_name: couchbase-db
    ports:
      - "8091-8097:8091-8097"
      - "9123:9123"
      - "11207:11207"
      - "11210:11210"
      - "11280:11280"
      - "18091-18097:18091-18097"
----

> After to apply these changes, initialize the container by executing the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After we apply these changes, we then need to initialize the container by executing the following command:
```

[source, bash]
----
docker-compose up -d
----

> Now, let's configure the Couchbase cluster for this study scenario:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, let's configure the Couchbase cluster for this example scenario:
```

. With the Couchbase container started, go to: http://localhost:8091/ui/index.html
. Select the "Configure New Cluster" option
+
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-01.png[Couchbase 01, align="center" width=80%]

> . Defines a name for the cluster name

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Define a name for the cluster name
```

+
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-04.png[Couchbase 04, align="center" width=80%]
. Click on "Scopes & Collections" and then click on "Add Collection"
. Enter `GameMatch` as the collection name and click the "Save" button to complete your creation
+
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-05.png[Couchbase 05, align="center" width=80%]
. Now, in the "Query" section, run this command https://www.couchbase.com/products/n1ql/[N1QL] to create the primary index for the `GameMatch` collection:
+
[source, n1ql]
----
CREATE PRIMARY INDEX primaryGameMatch ON jnopo._default.GameMatch
----
+
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-06.png[Couchbase 06, align="center" width=80%]

With a Couchbase cluster running, we just need to set up Eclipse JNoSQL to connect to it.

Apply the following changes into the `resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties` file:

[source, properties]
----
## Couchbase
jnosql.couchbase.host=couchbase://localhost
jnosql.couchbase.user=root
jnosql.couchbase.password=123456
jnosql.document.provider=org.eclipse.jnosql.databases.couchbase.communication.CouchbaseDocumentConfiguration
----

> The `jnosql.document.provider` property is required in this context because we have more than one Eclipse JNoSQL Database API for Document NoSQL implementations. Learn more about these configurations about Eclipse JNoSQL Database API for Couchbase at this https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#configuration-2[Git repository].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `jnosql.document.provider` property is required in this context because we have more than one Eclipse JNoSQL Database API for Document NoSQL implementations. You can learn more about the configurations available for Eclipse JNoSQL Database API for Couchbase in this https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases/tree/main?tab=readme-ov-file#configuration-2[Git repository].
```

That's all! Let's restart the https://openliberty.io/[Open Liberty] runtime in order to be able to make sure that everything is running smoothly:

* On Linux/Mac machines, perform the following command:
+
[source, bash]
----
./mvnw liberty:dev
----

* On Windows machines, perform the following command:
+
[source, powershell]
----
mvnw.cmd liberty:dev
----

> After some game matches, here are the evidences:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After some game matches, you should see something similar to that shown in the images below to prove that this data is now being stored in our new Couchbase database.
```

[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-verification-01.png[Couchbase Verification 01, align="center" width=80%]
[.img_border_light]
image::/img/blog/couchbase-verification-02.png[Couchbase Verification 02, align="center" width=80%]

> If you're interesting to take a look on the finished project code version developed during this challenge, clone this https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-jakartaNoSQL-game[Git repository] and navigate to the `database-switching-challenge` directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're interesting to take a look on the finished project code developed during this challenge, clone this https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-jakartaNoSQL-game[Git repository] and navigate to the `database-switching-challenge` directory.
```

[source, bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/OpenLiberty/sample-jakartaNoSQL-game.git
cd sample-jakartaNoSQL-game
cd database-switching-challenge
----

== Key Takeaways

> This challenge was an amazing opportunity to learn how it's ease to switch between NoSQL solutions by using Jakarta NoSQL, bringing one more item to your utility belt that could be interesting to save resources and costs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This blog has shown just how easy it can be to switch between NoSQL solutions by using Jakarta NoSQL, bringing one more item to your utility belt that could be useful in helping you save resources and costs.
```

> What we got by doing this challenge:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By reading this blog, you should now be familiar with:
```

* How to set up the Couchbase database cluster for development purposes;

> * How to switch between NoSQL database from different vendors, in our example: switching MongoDB to Couchbase;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* How to switch between NoSQL database from different vendors, in our example: switching from MongoDB to Couchbase;
```

== Next Steps: Continuing the Journey

Congratulations on getting this far!

This blog post is the 3rd part of a set of blog posts:

* link:../../../2024/05/03/simplifying-nosql-database-integration-with-jakarta-nosql.html[Simplifying NoSQL Database Integration with Jakarta NoSQL, window="_blank"];
* link:../../../2024/05/06/jakarta-nosql-in-action-meet-jnopo-game.html[Jakarta NoSQL in Action: JNopo Game, window="_blank"];

To see more sample projects, take a look at the official Eclipse JNoSQL samples repositories:

- https://github.com/jnosql/demos-se
- https://github.com/JNOSQL/demos-ee

To learn more about Eclipse JNoSQL, take a look at these official repositories:

- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql
- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-databases
- https://github.com/eclipse/jnosql-extensions

> if you're an expert on some NoSQL database that Eclipse JNoSQL doesn't support, feel free to open an issue or a PR on the project repositories mentioned above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if you're an expert on some NoSQL database that Eclipse JNoSQL doesn't support, feel free to open an issue or a PR on the project repositories mentioned above. Except for the NoSQL solutions mentioned like MongoDB and Couchbase, all the technology used in this blog post are open-source, so, what do you think about contributing to these projects? If you don't know how to get started to contribute, take a look at this https://www.youtube.com/live/7qhHOOoZEBU?feature=share[Coffee.withJava("Contribute to JNoSQL") Youtube Series], or if you prefer, feel free to contact me! Contributing to these projects is not just with codes, you could help a lot by promoting and speaking about them wherever you go! Contributing to open-source is a great way to boost your career, and improve your skills to become an effective developer and relevant in the market! Think about that!
```

> 
> Except for the NoSQL solutions mentioned like MongoDB and Couchbase, all the technology used in this blog post are open-source, so, what do you think about contributing to these projects?
> 
> If you don't know how to get started to contribute, take a look at this https://www.youtube.com/live/7qhHOOoZEBU?feature=share[Coffee.withJava("Contribute to JNoSQL") Youtube Series], or if you prefer, feel free to contact me!
> 
> Contributing to these projects is not just with codes, you could help a lot by promoting and speaking about them wherever you go!
> 
> Contributing to open-source is a great way to boost your career, and improve your skills to become an effective developer and relevant in the market! Think about that!
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
